1
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  
| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports
An improved PBFT consensus 
algorithm based on grouping 
and credit grading
Shannan Liu 1, Ronghua Zhang 1*, Changzheng Liu 1*, Chenxi Xu 2* & Jiaojiao Wang 1
To improve the blockchain consensus algorithm practical Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) with 
random master node selection, which has high communication overhead and a small supported 
network size, this paper proposes a Byzantine fault tolerant consensus algorithm based on credit 
(CBFT) enhanced with a grouping and credit model. The CBFT algorithm divides the network nodes 
according to the speed of their response to the management nodes, resulting in different consensus 
sets, and achieves consensus within and outside the group separately to reduce communication 
overhead and increase system security. Second, the nodes are divided into different types according 
to the credit model, each with different responsibilities to reduce the probability that the master node 
is a malicious node. Experimental results show that the throughput of the CBFT algorithm is 3.1 times 
that of PBFT and 1.5 times that of GPBFT when the number of nodes is 52. Our scheme has latency 
that is 7.4% that of PBFT and 38.8% that of GPBFT; CBFT has communication overhead that is 6.4% 
that of PBFT and 87.3% that of GPBFT. The number of nodes is 300, and the Byzantine fault tolerance 
is improved by 59.3%. These improvements are clearer with the increase in the number of nodes.
Blockchain technology originated from Bitcoin and was proposed by an academic named Satoshi Nakamoto 
in ­20081. It is essentially a distributed database that integrates distributed computing, cryptography, network 
transmission and other technologies and is decentralized, tamper-proof, programmable and ­traceable2–4.
The research on consensus algorithms started before the emergence of blockchain technology, and as the core 
of blockchain, it is mainly responsible for the correctness and consistency of data transmission and ­processing5. 
That is, the same ledger information is kept on the local nodes to avoid data tampering, and the data are quickly 
detected during the consistency protocol to ensure data security ­effectively6. Consensus algorithms can be clas-
sified into two categories, crash fault tolerance (CFT) and Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT), based on whether 
the system can solve the Byzantine ­errors7. CFT consensus algorithms cannot handle Byzantine errors and are 
mainly used in private ­chains8; BFT consensus algorithms can handle Byzantine errors and are widely used in 
public and consortium ­chains9; 10. The consensus algorithms of the BFT class are proof of work (PoW)11, proof of 
stake (PoS)10, delegated proof of sequiency (DPoS)12 and practical Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT). PoW mainly 
operates on SHA-256 cryptographic hash functions by computer arithmetic, which is not only computationally 
intensive but also less efficient in terms of consensus. The PoS algorithm emerged as an attempt to address the 
large amount of resources being wasted in the POW mechanism by calculating the percentage of holdings to the 
total number of coins and the time to hold the coins to determine the bookkeeping rights. The algorithm over-
comes the disadvantages of large amounts of arithmetic power to a certain extent but struggles with an uneven 
distribution of resources, coin holdings that tend to be centralized and less liquid, etc. The DPoS mechanism is 
optimized on the basis of PoS, where nodes elect producers to fulfill their rights and obligations on their behalf 
through voting elections, improving the efficiency of block generation but also deviating from the principle of 
decentralization. The above algorithms can ensure the reliability of the blockchain to a certain extent, but they all 
have their own shortcomings and cannot solve the problems of latency, throughput and security at the same time.
The PBFT consensus algorithm was improved by Castro et al.13 based on the BFT algorithm, which is used 
to solve the problem of large computation of the BFT algorithm, reducing the complexity of the algorithm from 
the exponential to the polynomial level, and still enables distributed nodes to reach consensus in the presence 
of a certain number of Byzantine nodes, which is recognized as the optimal algorithm to solve the Byzantine 
general ­problem14,15. However, the PBFT algorithm is degraded by the problems of the arbitrary master node 
OPEN
1College of Information Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Shihezi  832000, Xinjiang, China. 2School 
of Economics and Management, Qilu Normal University, Jinan  250200, Shandong, China. *email: zrh_oea@
sina.com; liucz@shzu.edu.cn; qlnujgxcx@163.com
2
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
selection method, high complexity of three-stage protocol communication, and the inability of nodes to join 
and exit dynamically, which reduces the performance of the consortium ­chain16.
To solve the above problems, this paper proposes an improved PBFT consensus algorithm that is more effi-
cient and secure. The scheme can ensure low communication overhead and high fault tolerance of the consortium 
chain. The main contributions of this paper are as follows.
•	 A node grouping model is proposed. Based on the response speed of the nodes of the consortium chain to the 
management nodes as a basis for grouping, the in-group consensus is performed first, and the management 
nodes take the result of the in-group consensus and then participate in the out-group consensus.
•	 A credit mechanism is proposed. By introducing a credit calculation formula, the nodes in the group are 
divided into management nodes, candidate nodes, and common nodes, and the nodes with high credit are 
selected from the candidate nodes as management nodes. The common nodes do not participate in consensus 
but accept the consensus results, which can improve the consensus efficiency of large consortium chains.
•	 A simulation and performance testing system based on this improved scheme is built. The effectiveness, as 
well as usability of the scheme, is demonstrated through simulation experiments. The experimental results 
show that the CBFT consensus algorithm has smaller latency, higher throughput, and less communication 
overhead, which can support larger-scale traceability, effectively improve the security of the system and reduce 
the impact of malicious nodes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the current state of the research on the 
improved PBFT algorithm. Section 3 discusses the working principles and flaws of PBFT. Section 4 provides 
a methodological description of the CBFT algorithm, including the grouping strategy and credit model. In 
Sect. 5, the implementation of the CBFT algorithm is demonstrated through simulation experiments. Section 6 
concludes the paper.
Related work
The Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) algorithm, proposed by Pease and Lamport in ­198017,18 analyses the way 
to achieve data consistency and integrity in peer-to-peer networks with malicious nodes or network blockage 
problems. The PBFT consensus algorithm was improved by Castro et al.13 based on the BFT algorithm for solving 
the consensus problem of distributed systems in current consortium chains. The PBFT algorithm inherits the 
advantages of BFT that can tolerate Byzantine nodes and reduces the communication complexity from O(n3) to 
O(n2) in the BFT algorithm with a relatively high consensus efficiency, a small number of starting nodes and a 
fault tolerance rate close to 1/3. It is a more widely used consensus algorithm in consortium ­chains19,20. However, 
the PBFT consensus algorithm has shortcomings in some ­aspects21. First, the selection of master nodes in the 
PBFT algorithm is based on the rotation of master nodes by number, which is vulnerable to DDoS ­attacks22 and 
sybil ­attacks23 in P2P networks and has security risks. Second, the broadcasting process of the PBFT three-stage 
protocol requires network-wide forwarding with great communication overhead, which seriously affects the 
performance of the consortium chain. Finally, the C/S architecture used in the PBFT algorithm cannot dynami-
cally sense the number of nodes. With the increase in the number of nodes, the performance drops sharply, 
which is not suitable for large-scale dynamic networks, limiting the application of blockchain technology in 
financial ­services24, supply chain ­management25, the Internet of Things (IoT)26–28 and other fields. Therefore, in 
response to the above problems, many scholars have proposed different approaches to improve the performance 
and efficiency of PBFT.
Lao Laphou et al.29 proposed a location-based and scalable PBFT consensus algorithm. Fixed nodes have 
more computational power than mobile nodes, and the possibility of becoming malicious nodes is very small. 
This algorithm reduces the consensus overhead and ensures the security of the system by selecting a fixed and 
trusted node as the consensus participant, but decentralization is also greatly reduced. Zhujun et al.30 quantified 
whether the nodes are reliable based on both security and computational capability and classified the nodes into 
four types. Only the management nodes among each type can be included in the selection of the master nodes as 
alternate master nodes, while only the candidate nodes with more votes can be turned into management nodes 
to guarantee system security. Gan et al.31 proposed an improved PBFT consensus algorithm, ePBFT, which 
improves the master node selection method of PBFT by setting the node life cycle so that the nodes can connect 
and exit dynamically and by the longest chain principle. Yong et al.32 proposed a credit-based improved PBFT 
consensus algorithm (CPBFT). The original C/S architecture is changed to a P2P architecture, the consensus step 
is reduced, the credit coefficient is introduced, and the voting method is used to select the master node so that 
the probability of a node being selected as the master node is influenced by its past behavior. Experiments show 
that the CPBFT algorithm reduces data transmission and improves throughput compared to the PBFT algorithm. 
The SG-PBFT33 consensus algorithm optimizes the original PBFT consensus process and uses a scoring group-
ing mechanism to achieve higher consensus efficiency. Kai et al.34 improved system security by selecting master 
nodes through a reputation model. Riyad et al.35 proposed a practical Byzantine fault-tolerant algorithm S-PBFT 
to address the problems of high communication overhead and low efficiency of the traditional Byzantine fault-
tolerant algorithm. The algorithm adds a node scoring mechanism, and all nodes are classified into consensus 
nodes, candidate nodes, and early nodes. To ensure that the nodes are as reliable as possible, the node scoring is 
dynamically changed according to the behavior of each node. ­EPBFT36 added a consensus node election based 
on a verifiable random function (VRF) to the original algorithm, making it more suitable for dynamic networks.
For consistency protocol improvement, Yanjun et al.37 proposed a high-performance and scalable Byzantine 
fault tolerance (HSBFT) to optimize the consistency protocol of PBFT and reduce its complexity from O(N2) to 
O(N), which improves the consensus efficiency but also weakens the polycentric characteristics of the consortium 
3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
blockchain. Yuxi et al.38 proposed a scalable hierarchical Byzantine fault-tolerant algorithm SHBFT to form a 
node structure with the same characteristics, which facilitates data storage and node ­management33,39. It can 
reduce the size of nodes and simplify the complexity of consensus. The SG-PBFT ­algorithm33 improved the 
traditional PBFT consensus algorithm by optimizing the consensus process and using a scoring mechanism; the 
method greatly improves consistency efficiency and can effectively prevent single-node attacks. Yuhao et al.40 
proposed a voting reward and punishment scheme and its corresponding credit evaluation scheme, which can 
not only motivate reliable nodes but also reduce the participation of abnormal nodes in the consensus process 
and establish a virtuous cycle of the system. At the same time, the scheme proposed a PBFT-based consistency 
and checkpointing protocol, which can improve the efficiency and flexibility of the system. Guangxia et al.41 and 
Jian et al.42 used a hashing algorithm to partition consistency nodes, which simplifies the consistency protocol 
and can avoid a large amount of communication between nodes, reduce the communication complexity of 
the network, and improve the scalability of the network, but cannot identify Byzantine nodes. Pengbo et al.43 
introduced a node credit scoring mechanism and simplified the consistency protocol. The experimental results 
show that the CSPBFT algorithm can shorten the transaction latency and improve the long-term operational 
efficiency of the system. The ­MCPBFT44 algorithm divides the many nodes involved in logistics information 
into multiple consensus sets and improves the consistency protocol into two stages based on PBFT. The results 
show that the MCPBFT algorithm can effectively improve the efficiency of consensus, ensure the timely update 
of logistics information, and improve the practicality of the traceability model.
Working principle and defects of PBFT
How the PBFT algorithm works. 
PBFT is considered one of the best algorithms to solve the Byzantine 
­problem13, which has three roles: client, master node, and replica node. When a client submits a transaction 
request, it is immediately sent to the master node, which initiates a transaction vote across the network, and the 
replica and master nodes work together to maintain the validity of the transaction vote. When the master node 
fails, a view change procedure is triggered to select a new master node.
The PBFT algorithm flow is shown in Fig. 1.
First, client C sends a message m to master node 0. The master node initiates the five-segment protocol of 
PBFT: request, pre-prepare, prepare, commit and reply. C denotes the client node, and 0 to 3 denote the consensus 
node, where 0 is the master node and 3 is the fault node.
Request stage The client node generates a message digest and adds request operation o and timestamp t to 
construct the request. After completing the signature, <REQUEST, o, t, C > σC is sent to the master node.
Pre-preparation stage After receiving the message, the master node constructs < <PRE-PREPARE, v, n, d > σ0, 
m> and broadcasts it to the replica node, which determines whether the following is satisfied, and receives the 
message if it is:
a.	 Checked that the message digest d is consistent with the digest generated by m.
b.	 Whether v in the received message is consistent with the current view.
c.	 Check if the same n and v but different d messages are received locally.
Preparation phase The replica node receives the pre-preparation message from the node and enters the prepa-
ration phase by broadcasting the message <PREPARE, v, n, d, i > σi to the other nodes. The node receives the 
preparation message to verify that the following requirements are met and receives 3f+1 (including itself) mes-
sages to enter the commit phase:
a.	 Prepare for whether the message signature is correct.
b.	 Determine whether the current node received messages with the same v and n but different signatures.
c.	 Determine the summary generated by the current node and whether it is consistent with d.
Commit phase The commit phase requires broadcasting < COMMIT, v, n, i > σi, and the other nodes determine:
a.	 The received message signature is correct.
request 
pre-prepare 
prepare 
commit 
reply 
C 
0 
1 
2 
×
3 
Figure 1.   PBFT algorithm flow.
4
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
b.	 The current node does not receive the same n under a v.
c.	 The current node generates the same message summary as the received d.
Reply phase After the current node receives 2f + 1 (including itself) commits, it records the message to the 
local log and replies to the client.
After client C receives the reply, the entire network reaches a consensus, and the message is committed to 
the local database.
Deficiencies of the PBFT algorithm. 
Despite the obvious advantages of PBFT over the other consensus 
algorithms, the mechanism still struggles with the following problems.
(1)	
Master node election is too arbitrary. In the existing PBFT algorithm, the master node election tends to take 
a rotating or random approach among all nodes, which makes the selection of master nodes vulnerable to 
DDoS attacks and sybil attacks in P2P networks with high security risks.
(2)	
The voting process is too complex, and the three-stage protocol broadcast process of the PBFT consensus 
algorithm requires network-wide forwarding with great communication overhead, which imposes an exces-
sive load on the consensus network.
(3)	
Nodes in the PBFT consensus algorithm cannot join and exit at will, affecting system availability.
(4)	
The nodes lack an effective reward and punishment mechanism, which cannot reward honest nodes or 
punish evil nodes, making the nodes less loyal and motivated.
CBFT Consensus algorithm
Overall thinking. 
To improve the problems of the above PBFT algorithm, a consensus algorithm CBFT 
based on grouping and credit model improvement is proposed. The main improvements of the CBFT mecha-
nism include the following aspects.
(1)	
A grouping strategy is proposed. A large number of nodes are divided into multiple groups to reduce the 
size of the nodes, the complexity of the consensus is simplified and the system overhead is reduced.
(2)	
A credit model is defined to optimally manage node elections. Based on data such as the response per-
formance of nodes, historical credit value and the correct rate of reaching consensus on transactions, the 
trustworthiness of nodes is evaluated, and nodes with high credit value are selected as management nodes, 
which can effectively reduce the probability of management nodes being Byzantine nodes and improve 
system security.
(3)	
Optimize the consistency protocol. The three-stage main protocol of out-group PBFT is optimized into 
two stages to improve consensus efficiency.
The consensus process is shown in Fig. 2.
Grouping strategy. 
Using the authentication mechanism for nodes to join the consortium chain, m nodes 
are randomly selected as the initial management nodes, and the nodes are divided into G consensus sets based 
on the response rate of the remaining nodes to the management nodes as a grouping basis.
Consensus begins
Whether to initialize
Initializing credit values
pregrouping 
regrouping 
Executive credit model 
update team leader 
End of mandate
Consensus outside the group
Consensus within the group
End of Consensus
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
Figure 2.   CBFT consensus process.
5
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Management node i examines the list of members in group ­Gi, determines whether the number of nodes is 
greater than ­Nmax, stops broadcasting the message, is less than ­Nmax, and broadcasts the receiving member mes-
sage <GROUP, ­t1, ­Gi > σi, where ­Nmax is the maximum number of nodes allowed in the group. ­t1 is the timer, ­Gi 
is the list of nodes contained in the current group, and σi is the signature of management node i.
Node x receives a broadcast message from the management node, verifies that the message signature is cor-
rect, and if it is correct, initiates a group entry request to the management node <GROUP-REQUEST,x,t2>σx.
The management node receives the group admission application, verifies that it is correct, adds node x to the 
group membership list ­Gi and sends it a message to confirm <GROUP-COMMIT, ­t3, ­Gi > σi.
At the end of grouping, the management node broadcasts the respective group list ­Gi, and if it is verified to 
be correct, it sends this information down to the members in each group to complete the group confirmation.
The management node is the node with the highest credit value in the group and participates in the global 
consensus as the proxy node of the group. Therefore, after one round of consensus, the node credit value is 
updated, a new management node is selected based on the new credit value of the node, and the group is 
regrouped according to the above process.
To address the problem that nodes cannot be dynamically connected in PBFT, CBFT establishes a node entry 
and an exit mechanism, which enables authorized nodes to dynamically join the consensus network without 
affecting the system structure, as shown in Fig. 3.
When a new node wants to join the network, it first looks for the nearest management node and sends a 
search request to the surrounding nodes. The node forwards information from the management node to the 
new node with a timestamp, compares the timestamps, and sends a group request to the management node of 
the node that received the reply first. The management node adds the new node information to the list of group 
members and provides the new node with information about the other nodes in the group, and the new node 
joins the network completion. The new node enters the network as a common node, does not participate in the 
consensus, and only receives the consensus results.
In the node exit mechanism, if the exit from the network is a management node, it first broadcasts a message 
to downgrade the status to a candidate node, waits for the successful election of a new management node, and 
reports the exit to the management node. If it is a candidate node or a common node to exit the network, it can 
directly apply to the management node.
Credit model. 
PBFT determines the master nodes sequentially according to the Formula p = v mod N. The 
anomalous nodes are likely to be elected as master nodes, which affect the security of the system. In the improved 
CBFT algorithm, the credit model is introduced to optimize the master node election so that the node with a 
high credit value has a higher probability of becoming the master node.
In the credit model, the node credit value is set to [0,100] with an initial value of 40, and the nodes involved 
in the CBFT consensus are divided into three categories according to the size of the credit value: management 
nodes, candidate nodes, and common nodes. Both management nodes and candidate nodes are consensus 
nodes, and common nodes only receive the consensus results and do not participate in the consensus process, 
as shown in Table 1.
To evaluate the current credit value of the node, the node trustworthiness is measured using data such as the 
node’s responsiveness performance, historical credit value, and correctness of reaching transaction consensus 
as metrics.
Definition 1: Latency index is the delay in the process of responding to various messages, expressed as
Common nodes
Management nodes
Candidate nodes
new node 
Figure 3.   New node entry process.
Table 1.   Node credit value categories.
Credit value
[0–40]
(40–60)
[60–100]
Node category
Common nodes
Candidate nodes
Management nodes
6
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
where ­dij denotes the delay of the jth transaction of node i; ­dmax denotes the maximum delay allowed by the 
exchange, and if the maximum delay is exceeded, it indicates that the node failed to execute the transaction.
Definition 2: Transaction completion rate with a penalty mechanism refers to the percentage of nodes that 
successfully participate in each transaction after entering the network, and is expressed as
where n is the total number of system transactions and m denotes the number of transactions completed by 
node i. μ is the identifier of whether the transaction is successful or not, with a successful transaction μ of 1 and 
a failed transaction μ of -1. Both the promotion effect of successfully completed transactions on the node and 
the adverse effect on the node by affecting the normal conduct of transactions are considered, which can better 
distinguish the credit value of the node.
Definition 3: Influence of historical credit values. The credit status of the current node is influenced by the 
historical credit value, and is expressed as
The coefficient z indicates the degree of historical state influence.
Definition 4: The final credit score of a node is calculated as follows.
x is the weight of the node’s transaction latency, y is the weight of the node’s own completed transactions, and 
x + y + z = 1. The credit model intuitively reflects the node’s performance in the consensus. If a node has small 
latency, a high transaction completion rate, and good historical credit value, it is highly credible; conversely, if 
a node has large latency, a low transaction completion rate, and poor historical credit value, it is less credible.
Optimized consistency protocol. 
The CBFT consensus algorithm contains in-group and out-group con-
sensus, which mainly achieves consensus among the nodes involved in consensus. The group member nodes 
receive the management node broadcast, and in the intragroup preparation and commit phases, the manage-
ment nodes receive enough information about the proposal. When the out-group preparation phase is com-
pleted, it means that enough nodes have verified and passed the proposal initiated by the client, and the out-
group commit phase is only the confirmation of the proposal passed in the preparation phase to ensure that 
enough nodes have completed the proposal verification. Thus, the three-phase protocol outside the group can be 
optimized into two phases, as shown in Fig. 4. Nodes join the network, randomly elect the initial management 
node, form different groupings according to the grouping policy, initialize the credit values of each node, and 
execute the optimal consistency protocol of the CBFT algorithm, as follows.
•	 Out-group pre-preparation phase upon receiving a request from a client, the management node validates and 
sequences the request and broadcasts a pre-preparation message < OUT-PRE-PREPARE, n, t, v, D(m) > σi to 
the group members, where n is the sequence number assigned to the request, t is the timestamp, v denotes 
the view number, D(m) is the message digest, and σi is the signature of management node i.
•	 Intragroup preparation phase group members receive and validate the pre-preparation message, at which 
point all nodes in the network have received the pre-preparation message.
•	 Intragroup commit phase group members verify the proposal, and if it is correct, the response is sent to the 
proposal < IN-COMMIT, n, t, v, D(m) > σx to the group leader, where σx is the signature of node x.
•	 Out-group preparation phase the management node receives responses from a sufficient number of group 
members, turns on global consensus, and broadcasts the result of the in-group consensus < OUT-PREPARE, 
n, t, v, D(m) > σi to all management nodes.
•	 Intragroup reply phase the management node receives more than 2f. identical messages and sends a request 
acknowledgment < IN-REPLY, n, t, v, D(m) > σi to the group members.
•	 Out-group reply phase the management node replies to the client < OUT-REPLY, n, t, v, D(m) > σi, and when 
the client receives f + 1 identical reply messages, the message is added to the end of the blockchain and con-
sensus ends.
At the end of one round of consensus, the credit value of each node is calculated according to the credit model, 
the group reelects the management node, and repeats the above operation until all transactions are completed.
(1)
D(i) =

1 −
 dij
dmax
3
∗100
(2)
T(i) = 100
n
m

i=1
µi
(3)
C(i)′ = zC(i −1)
(4)
C(i) = 1
3

xD(i) + yT(i) + C(i)′
= 1
3

100x

1 −
 dij
dmax
3
+ 100y

1
n
m

i=1
µi

+ zC(i −1)

7
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Experiments and analysis of results
Experimental environment. 
A blockchain system is simulated and implemented based on the Java pro-
gramming language, and for comparison and reference, the PBFT and ­GPBFT45 algorithms are used to jointly 
demonstrate the superiority of this scheme. After the system runs for 5 minutes, the client initiates 200 sets of 
requests and selects different numbers of nodes into 5 consensus sets, each with the same initial trust value50, 
to test the performance of three aspects of throughput, latency, communication overhead, and security in the 
same network environment. Five hundred trials are conducted for each set, and the average of 500 trials is taken 
as the test result.
Throughput. 
In blockchain systems, the throughput refers to the number of transactions processed by the 
system per unit of time, usually expressed as TPS. The higher the throughput is, the better the system’s ability to 
process transactions, which is an important indicator of the system’s concurrent processability. The calculation 
formula is as follows:
where ­TransactionsΔt denotes the number of transactions processed in time Δt. As shown in Fig. 5, the through-
put of CBFT is lower than that of the traditional PBFT and GPBFT consensus algorithms when the number of 
nodes is small. After the number of nodes exceeds 40, the TPS of the PBFT and GPBFT algorithms continues 
to decline, while CBFT still maintains a more stable throughput. The main reason for this is that the number of 
nodes is small, and the preliminary grouping will generate larger resource consumption. When the number of 
nodes exceeds a certain number, the throughput of CBFT will exceed that of PBFT and GPBFT. Therefore, as 
the number of nodes increases, CBFT has more obvious advantages and is suitable for large consortium chains.
Consensus latency. 
Consensus latency is the time elapsed from the beginning of a transaction to the end 
of the transaction and is an important indicator of how fast the consensus algorithm is running; a low consensus 
latency allows transactions to be confirmed quickly, making the system more secure and practical. The formula 
is expressed as follows:
Tc denotes the transaction confirmation time, and ­Tr denotes the transaction generation time. In Fig. 6, it 
can be seen that the consensus latency increases gradually with the increase in the number of nodes, but the 
consensus latency of CBFT is considerably lower than that of GPBFT and PBFT; with the increase of the number 
of nodes, the latency growth rate of PBFT is substantially larger than that of GPBFT and CBFT; especially when 
the number of nodes exceeds 60, the latency of PBFT has reached more than 200 ms, and that of GPBFT reaches 
75 ms, while the delay of CBFT still remains approximately 20 ms. The results show that CBFT makes a great 
improvement in terms of latency.
(5)
TPS = Transactionst
t
(6)
Td = Tc −Tr
request 
in-prepare 
in-commit 
out-prepare 
in-reply 
out-reply 
G1 
C 
G2 
Gn 
G11 
G12 
G13 
G21 
G22 
G23 
Gn1 
Gn2 
Gn3 
... 
... 
... 
... 
Figure 4.   CBFT improved the consensus process.
8
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Communications overhead. 
The communication overhead is the amount of communication incurred by 
the nodes in the system to execute the consensus algorithm.
Assuming that the number of nodes in each consensus set is the same (not less than 3), the number of con-
sensus sets should be no less than 4, and the total number of nodes in the system is N (N>12). There are three 
phases in PBFT where messages need to be sent for communication. First, the client sends the request to the 
master node, which sends the pre-preparation message to all replica nodes, and the number of communications 
in the pre-preparation phase is (N−1). After receiving the message, the node verifies and sends the message in 
the preparation phase, and the number of communications in this phase is (N−1)2. Finally, in the commit phase, 
the node receives the preparation message, and when the verification result is consistent, the submitted message 
is sent to all nodes, and the number of communications in this phase is N(N−1). Based on the communication 
time of the above three phases, we simplify PBFT to complete the consistent communication time ­T1 as follows:
In CBFT, there are two phases in each consensus set where messages need to be sent for communication. 
Assuming that each consensus set has M(M ≥ 3) nodes, the number of communications in the preparation 
phase is N-N/M and the number of communications in the commit phase is N-N/M. Thus, the total number of 
communications in the consensus set ­T2 is:
(7)
T1 = N −1 + (N −1)2 + N(N −1) = 2N(N −1)
Figure 5.   PBFT and CBFT throughput comparison.
Figure 6.   Comparison of consensus latency of PBFT and CBFT.
9
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
The consensus within the consensus set, the participation in global consensus, and the number of commu-
nications ­T3 for:
In summary, the total number of CBFT communications ­T4 is:
When N > 12 and ­T4 < ­T1, the improved communication overhead is smaller.
Figure 7 shows a comparison of the communication overhead of the CBFT, GPBFT, and PBFT consensus 
algorithms. It can be seen that the communication overhead of GPBFT and CBFT is much smaller and grows 
slowly with the increase in the number of consensus nodes in the whole blockchain network. When the number 
of network nodes is 36, the communication overhead of PBFT is 2691, GPBFT is 271, and CBFT is 248 (5 con-
sensus sets), which is 90.8% lower than PBFT and 8.5% lower than GPBFT. The main reason for these results 
is that CBFT divides the nodes in the system into G consensus sets, and only the management nodes within 
the consensus sets participate in the consensus outside the consensus sets, thus reducing the number of nodes 
involved in the global consensus and reducing the amount of information sent between nodes to each other.
Security testing. 
Security is an important attribute in blockchain systems, and malicious nodes are an 
important cause of consensus failure. In this paper, we introduce a credit model to calculate the credit value of 
nodes and use this credit value as the basis for selecting master nodes, which can effectively reduce the prob-
ability of malicious nodes becoming management nodes and improve system security. In this section, we analyze 
the security of CBFT and discuss it in terms of two aspects: the throughput under different Byzantine node occu-
pancy ratios and the maximum number of Byzantine nodes that the algorithm can tolerate.
Throughput under different Byzantine occupancy ratios. 
To test the performance of CBFT under 
various numbers of nodes and different Byzantine node occupancy ratios, we tested the throughput of CBFT at 
100, 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 nodes and set the ratio of malicious nodes to 10 and 20%. The results of their 
experimental comparisons are shown in Fig. 8.
In the figure, we can see that the throughput of the network gradually decreases as the number of nodes 
increases, and the throughput of CBFT is considerably better than that of PBFT, while we find that the through-
put does not increase substantially after the percentage of Byzantine nodes increases. The main reason for this 
is that Byzantine nodes are dispersed within each consensus set due to the grouping strategy, and they cannot 
be elected as management nodes due to the credit model, which cannot further disrupt the global consensus. 
Even if there is such an unexpected situation in one consensus set, the other consensus sets can complete the 
consensus process because of the fault tolerance of the global PBFT consensus.
(8)
T2 = N −N
M + N −N
M = 2

N −N
M

(9)
T3 = N
M
 N
M −1

=
 N
M
2
−N
M
(10)
T4 = T2 + T3 =
 N
M
2
−3N
M + 2N
Figure 7.   Comparison of PBFT and CBFT traffic.
10
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
The maximum number of Byzantine nodes that can be tolerated. 
The maximum number of Byz-
antine nodes that can be tolerated by PBFT is 1/3, and PBFT fails when it exceeds 1/3. According to the group-
ing strategy of CBFT, CBFT can tolerate 1/3 of the consensus set to be all Byzantine nodes, and the rest of the 
consensus set can tolerate at most 1/2 of the nodes to be Byzantine nodes; therefore, the fault tolerance of the 
CBFT algorithm is considerably higher than that of the PBFT algorithm. Figure 9 shows the maximum number 
of Byzantine nodes tolerated by the PBFT and CBFT algorithms with different numbers of nodes. The fault toler-
ance of CBFT is higher than that of PBFT and increases with increasing node size.
Conclusion
To address the problems of limited network scale supported by the PBFT algorithm and unfavorable to the 
development of large consortium chains, an improved Byzantine fault-tolerant algorithm (CBFT) based on 
grouping and credit grading is proposed to divide large-scale network nodes into different consensus sets and 
select consensus nodes based on credit values. Simulation results show that compared with the PBFT and GPBFT 
algorithms, CBFT has considerably improved the system performance and reliability in terms of throughput, 
latency, communication overhead, and security. However, some limitations need to be overcome. For example, 
the identity of nodes joining the network cannot be verified at present and can only be authenticated by the 
MSP of the consortium chain. In future work, we will investigate how to perform node identity authentication to 
Figure 8.   Throughput of the PBFT and CBFT algorithms with different Byzantine occupancy ratios.
Figure 9.   Maximum number of Byzantine nodes tolerated by the PBFT and CBFT algorithms.
11
Vol.:(0123456789)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
further improve system security. Moreover, we intend to explore the possibility of applying blockchain to smart 
agriculture to further improve the algorithm and promote blockchain development (Supplementary material).
Data availability
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study available from the corresponding author on reason-
able request.
Received: 8 August 2022; Accepted: 25 January 2023
References
	 1.	 Essaid, M. et al. Network Usage of Bitcoin Full Node. 2018 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology 
Convergence (ICTC). 1286–1291 (2018).
	 2.	 Liu, S. et al. Improvement of the Pbft Algorithm Based On Grouping and Reputation Value Voting. Int. J. Digital Crime Forensics 
(IJDCF). 14, 1–15 (2022).
	 3.	 Yang, L. The blockchain: State-Of-the-art and research challenges. J. Ind. Inf. Integr. 15, 80–90 (2019).
	 4.	 Zhang, J., Zhong, S., Wang, T., Chao, H. & Wang, J. Blockchain-based systems and applications: A survey. J. Internet Technol. 21, 
1–14 (2020).
	 5.	 Banafa, A. Blockchain Technology and Applications, River Publishers.
	 6.	 Yin, H. et al. Consensus in lens of consortium blockchain: An empirical study. Algorithms and Architectures for Parallel Processing, 
ICA3PP 2020, PT III. 12454, 282-296 (2020).
	 7.	 Wang, K. et al. A trusted consensus fusion scheme for decentralized collaborated learning in massive Iot domain. Inf. Fusion. 72, 
100–109 (2021).
	 8.	 Ge, Z., Loghin, D., Ooi, B. C., Ruan, P. & Wang, T. Hybrid blockchain database systems: Design and performance. Proc. Vldb 
Endow. 15, 1092–1104 (2022).
	 9.	 Saltini, R. Bigfoot: A robust optimal-latency Bft blockchain consensus protocol with dynamic validator membership. Comput. 
Netw. 204, 108632 (2022).
	10.	 Vukolić, M. The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work vs. Bft replication, Springer, 2015:112–125.
	11.	 Schinckus, C. Proof-of-work based blockchain technology and anthropocene: An undermined situation?. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev. 152, 111682 (2021).
	12.	 Xu, G., Liu, Y. & Khan, P. W. Improvement of the Dpos consensus mechanism in blockchain based on vague sets. IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Inform. 16, 4252–4259 (2019).
	13.	 Castro, M. & Liskov, B. Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance. 1999:173–186.
	14.	 De Angelis, S., Aniello, L., Baldoni, R., Lombardi, F., Margheri, A., Sassone, V. PBFT vs proof-of-authority: Applying the CAP 
theorem to permissioned blockchain. Italian Conference on Cyber Security. 11 (Milan, Italy, 2018).
	15.	 Sukhwani, H., Martínez, J. M., Chang, X., Trivedi, K. S. & Rindos, A. performance modeling of Pbft consensus process for permis-
sioned blockchain network (Hyperledger Fabric). IEEE, 2017:253–255.
	16.	 Li, W. et al. A scalable multi-layer Pbft consensus for blockchain. Ieee Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 32, 1146–1160 (2020).
	17.	 Lamport, L., Shostak, R. & Pease, M. The Byzantine generals problem. 2019:203–226.
	18.	 Pease, M., Shostak, R. & Lamport, L. Reaching agreement in the presence of faults. J. ACM (JACM). 27, 228–234 (1980).
	19.	 Yu, G., Wu, B. & Niu, X. Improved blockchain consensus mechanism based on Pbft algorithm. Improved Blockchain Consensus 
Mechanism Based on PBFT Algorithm, 2020:14–21.
	20.	 Gu, R., Chen, B. & Huang, D. Primary node selection algorithm of Pbft based on anomaly detection and reputation model. Primary 
Node Selection Algorithm of PBFT Based on Anomaly Detection and Reputation Model, 2021:767–776.
	21.	 Li, W. et al. A scalable multi-layer Pbft consensus for blockchain. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 32, 1146–1160 (2021).
	22.	 Rahmani, H., Sahli, N. & Kammoun, F. Joint entropy analysis model for ddos attack detection. IEEE, 2009:267–271.
	23.	 Douceur, J. R. The sybil attack. Springer, 2002:251–260.
	24.	 Xie, J. Optimization of financial shared service center based on blockchain. Optimization of Financial Shared Service Center Based 
on Blockchain, 2021:109–111.
	25.	 Chawla, P., Kumar, A., Nayyar, A. & Naved, M. Blockchain, Iot and Ai Technologies for Supply Chain Management, CRC Press.
	26.	 Patil, P., Sangeetha, M. & Bhaskar, V. Blockchain for Iot access control, security and privacy: A review. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 117, 
1815–1834 (2021).
	27.	 Wright, C. S. , &  Savanah, S. Operating system for blockchain IoT devices.  US11128607B2 (2021).
	28.	 Huelsen, P., Graglia, M. A. V., Lazzareschi, N. & de Hoyos Guevara, A. The growing moral challenge in the face of technologies: 
Internet, social networks, IoT, Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Innovation 
and Management (ICIM2020), 2020:549–559.
	29.	 Lao, L., Dai, X., Xiao, B. & Guo, S. G-PBFT: A Location-Based and Scalable Consensus Protocol for IoT-Blockchain Applications. 
2020 IEEE 34th International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium IPDPS 2020. 664–673 (2020).
	30.	 Zhang, Z., Zhu, D. & Fan, W. Qpbft: Practical byzantine fault tolerance consensus algorithm based on quantified-role. IEEE, 
2020:991–997.
	31.	 Jun, G., Li, Q. & Zihao, C. Improvement of byzantine fault tolerant consensus algorithm for blockchain. Comput. Appl. 39, 
2148–2155 (2019).
	32.	 Wang, Y., Song, Z. & Cheng, T. Improvement research of PBFT consensus algorithm based on credit. Blockchain Trustworthy Syst 
Blocksys 2019(1156), 47–59 (2020).
	33.	 Xu, G. et al. Sg-Pbft: A secure and highly efficient distributed blockchain Pbft consensus algorithm for intelligent internet of 
vehicles. J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 164, 1–11 (2022).
	34.	 Lei, K., Zhang, Q., Xu, L. & Qi, Z. Reputation-based byzantine fault-tolerance for consortium blockchain. IEEE, 2018:604–611.
	35.	 Almakki, R. et al. Fault tolerance byzantine algorithm for lower overhead blockchain. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2022, (2022).
	36.	 Li, Y. et al. An extensible consensus algorithm based on PBFT. 2019 International Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed Com-
puting and Knowledge Discovery (CYBERC). 17–23 (2019).
	37.	 Jiang, Y. & Lian, Z. High performance and scalable byzantine fault tolerance. IEEE, 2019:1195–1202.
	38.	 Li, Y., Qiao, L. & Lv, Z. An optimized byzantine fault tolerance algorithm for consortium blockchain. Peer Peer Netw. Appl. 14, 
2826–2839 (2021).
	39.	 Chen, Y. et al. An Improved Algorithm for Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance to Large-Scale Consortium Chain. Inf. Process. 
Manage. 59, 102884 (2022).
	40.	 Wang, Y. et al. Study of blockchains’s consensus mechanism based on credit. Ieee Access. 7, 10224–10231 (2019).
	41.	 Xu, G., Wang, Y. & Leng, J. Improved Pbft Algorithm Based On Vague Sets. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2022, 6144664 (2022).
12
Vol:.(1234567890)
Scientific Reports |        (2023) 13:13030  | 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-28856-x
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
	42.	 Yang, J., Jia, Z., Su, R., Wu, X. & Qin, J. Improved Fault-tolerant consensus based on the Pbft algorithm. Ieee Access. 10, 30274–30283 
(2022).
	43.	 Si, P., Wang, F., Sun, E., Su, Y. & Kadoch, M. Bei-Tab: Enabling Secure and Distributed Airport Baggage Tracking with Hybrid 
Blockchain-Edge System. Wireless Communicat. Mobile Comput. 2021, 2741435 (2021).
	44.	 Li, X., Lv, F., Xiang, F., Sun, Z. & Sun, Z. Research on key technologies of logistics information traceability model based on con-
sortium chain. IEEE Access. 8, 69754–69762 (2020).
	45.	 Wang, Y., Zhong, M. & Cheng, T. Research on Pbft consensus algorithm for grouping based on feature trust. Sci. Rep. 12, 1–12 
(2022).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62141205 
and the Fund Project of XJPCC(2023CB005, 2022CB002-08, 2022CA007, 2019AB001).
Author contributions
S.L. and C.L. conceived the experiment(s), S.L., C.X. and R.Z. conducted the experiment(s), J.W., C.L., C.X. and 
S.L. analysed the results. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41598-​023-​28856-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.Z., C.L. or C.X.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
